---
date: 2025-01-19
title: On the Launch of Robot Forest
description: Reflections on launching my new studio and turning 20.
---
# Release Early and Often.
Welcome to 2025! I'm a couple weeks late, but one of my resolutions was to start writing more and this represents my first step in that journey. 

It's been a busy start to 2025 and I just recently launched my new developer studio [Robot Forest](https://robotforest.dev). I've been meaning to launch this thing for years, and finally got the confidence to do so over the holidays. I also finally submitted version 3.0 of my app, [Wheels](https://wheels.trevorpiltch.com), to the app store. This has been one of those projects that I've been consistently tweaking for almost two years. Every time I thought I'd release it, I'd come up with another feature to add, implement it, and then repeat the process. With something like this, I think I've learned that the most important thing is to follow the old software mantra, release early and often. For the longest time, I was the only one with eyes on this version and was overly critical of every detail. By releasing it to the public, I've already gotten new feedback and praise about the new features. While not the biggest achievement so far, I'm definitely proud of this one and excited to break the cycle of feature bloating. 

As for the future of these projects, I have a lot of ideas floating around my head and I'm excited to get started. I'm hoping that I'll be able to work more on these over the coming semester. I'm also hoping to worry less about getting the perfect features down and more just getting things working. A lot of the delays I've had were because I wanted to have the perfect UI or architecture, something that is inherently not possible.

I'm going to keep this post short as I have some labs and other work to get through, but I wanted to post something while I still had the motivation. This post definitely isn't perfect, but I'm working on being okay with that. 
