---
date: 2023-04-21
title: Meditation
description: Tood.
---


# **O(1)**
01010100 01101000 01101001 01101110 01101011 00100000 01000100 01101001
01100110 01100110 01100101 01110010 01100101 01101110 01110100 00101110

## 00000001
To start, you sit down with a mug full of Red Bull because you're scared
that you'll fall asleep. You flip open your Mac and hear the iconic
chime. The machine whirs to life, opens its eyes and greets you with the
familiar, *please enter your password*. With the Mac fully awake, you
can begin your process. Most importantly, is the music, so you open the
music app and put on some AC/DC. You know you shouldn't listen to music
this loud at 11 p.m., but you also should be asleep, so you don't really
care.

Next, you open your preferred text editor, Fleet. It's too complicated
for you (even with years of programming experience you still don't know
what a Docker Container does) but you think it looks cool, so you still
use it. You open your project folder, minigrep, and stare at the code
from the other night. At first, you wonder what you were thinking then,
like why you added a comment that just said "help."

You know you are self-critical and anyone else would miss that comment
if they looked at your code, but that doesn't stop you. Even though you
need to finish the project, you can't get over the mistakes you made
previously. You go through every line of code and meticulously check
each character. You find extra spaces, and mis-indentations, nothing
that affects the execution of your code, but you still can't just let
them be there. Some deep instinct is telling you to spend all your time
searching for mistakes, blocking you from finishing the project. When
you get to the end of the file, you wish you hadn't. You wish there was
more to go through. More mistakes to find. More code to be self-critical
of.

## 00000010
What's written at the start is a message in binary, the language of
computers. Computers don't have the millions of years of evolution
that's gone into the human brain, so they use transistors. A transistor
is the simplest unit of a computer, either on, 1, or off, 0. These units
are called bits (short for binary digit). Everything else is built from
these two states. Combine a string of eight bits together (resulting in
256, or 2 to the 8^th^ power, different combinations) and you get more
than enough room for the English alphabet. Combine 2,073,600 of these
bits together, then an HD image is created. If you combine many billions
of bits, then you've created a neural network, capable of understanding
human speech.

You don't need some fancy computer science degree or a thousand-dollar
machine to program. It just requires some creativity, patience, and a
little extra time. You can use any machine and program in any language.
All of this does not mean coding is easy, it's not. Usually, things
don't work, and you have no idea why, which, to me, is the appeal of it.
I love the struggle to find the solution. I love the reward for when I
finally solve the problem and get the compiled successfully
notification.

The part that's hardest for me, however, is trying to get it perfect. I
go over every line of code multiple times, searching for extra spaces or
poorly formatted code, neither of which affect the running of my code. I
reorganize my code (or using the programming term, refactor) every
couple of days. When I open the computer, a small voice comes on in my
head that tells me that I made a mistake somewhere. I can't stop until I
find that mistake. It drives me insane. Searching line after line.
Character after character.

## 00000011
It's true that most people don't understand how computers work, but
there is a small subset of the population that does: computer
programmers. My dad is one of those people. He spends his time buried in
the terminal (the interface between the human and computer), with
hundreds of lines of green and yellow text flying by. One might be:
LinkedList is a raw type. `References to generic type LinkedList\<E\> should be parameterized`. This probably means nothing to most people, but my dad would understand instantly. He just forgot to add the object type to his list
declaration.

My dad's worked from home his entire life. His office was connected to
our mudroom, and I used to wander up there frequently. As a child, I
loved to stand behind him as he lost himself in the world of the
terminal. I watched the messages roll down his screen like rain dripping
down a car window. Occasionally, a message would roll down in bright red
characters, and nothing else would follow. At the bottom of the message
would be an indication of a fatal error. To me, fatal error sounded like
a scary thing, but I never saw my dad frightened. He just typed away on
his keyboard, and then magically, the message was gone.

As a kid, full of curiosity and with much to learn about the world, this
seemed impossible. How did the computer know what my dad was typing? How
did my dad know what to tell the computer? I used to think there was
somebody on the other end of this "terminal" that was interpreting what
he was writing and performing all the calculations.

Now, I know that's not how computers work (although it would be cool if
there was a miniature city within them to run everything). Despite this,
the curiosity I used to have is still there. When the code runs, I feel
that same rush I felt years ago standing behind my dad.

## 00000100
The first time I ever touched a piece of code was in 6th grade, when my
dad gave me a subscription to a coding website. I used it for a couple
of months, but then adolescence took full effect and I stopped. I
instead focused on soccer, academics, and spending time with friends.
Those friends said that it was weird that I coded, they called me a
"nerd". I wanted to be normal , to "fit in". So, I stopped programming.
I wanted to be interested in the things they were interested in: sports,
parties, and girls.

That happened for two weeks at the end of 8th grade. I went to England
on a school trip with my two best friends from middle school, their
girlfriends, and 10 other kids who I didn't really know. I made a ton of
British friends, had a lot of fun, and broke a few too many rules along
the way. I was some ultra-outgoing version of myself, talking every
chance I had.

I'm not entirely sure when it happened, but I remember talking to my
childhood best friend from home, Max. We were on the phone, and he asked
a simple question, "What are you doing with your life right now?" It
threw me off. For the first time in a while, I felt like I was becoming
worse. I was having a lot of fun, don't get me wrong, but it wasn't
helping me. I wasn't learning anything, and I wasn't really doing
anything meaningful. I was a normal teenager, wasn't that all I ever
wanted? That night I sat in the cramped hotel room, with two other kids, contemplating my life.

As with any deep contemplation, I had my AirPods in, probably listening
to Manchester Orchestra (I don't remember the specific song, but it was
most likely "I Know How to Speak"). There was something I felt that
night that I had never felt before. I didn't know what to call it at the
time, but now I know that it was the beginning of my commitment to
perfectionism. It felt like my life wasn't good enough, like I wasn't
doing enough or learning enough. I don't remember what happened the rest
of that night. I probably blocked it out and archived it away in a
folder in my brain somewhere. However, I do remember leaving that hotel
room the following morning, with a need to find my purpose. I entered
that room as a fourteen-year-old, I left as a kid needing to know his
life trajectory.

Things didn't work out so well after that. My girlfriend at the time
broke up with me, my best friend and his ex-girlfriend got back
together, so he stopped talking to me, and I struggled to reconnect back
with Max. I lost interest in school, zoning out during classes and
barely working on homework. I felt stuck, knowing I had a purpose
somewhere, but without any idea how to find it. I spent all my time in
my head, trying to figure out what exactly I was searching for. I
stopped talking to people and became one of the quietest kids at school.
I lost most of my friends and didn't really talk to my parents. I
started to think that I wasn't supposed to have a purpose. What if I was
the person who never had a purpose? The person who everyone says is
smart and will go far in life, but never does. I couldn't live with
this. I needed my life to be perfect and it was driving me insane that
it wasn't.

## 00000101
At the end of middle school, my dad and I went shopping for a new
laptop. We were trying to figure out what specs were appropriate for my
use, and originally, we settled on a base model MacBook Air. He
offhandedly mentioned that I would need more power when I wanted to
code. He said, "Well, if you want to learn to code, you should get a
MacBook Pro." We didn't end up buying a computer, but that stuck with
me. He thought I could program. I had only seen him code with his
behemoth 15-inch MacBook Pro and a Cornell Engineering degree behind
him. What could I, a fourteen-year-old, do with a computer? The following morning, I decided to find out. I snuck up to his office and plugged his Mac into his giant monitor. The screen began to glow, and I found the
*App Development with Swift* book, an intro programming book designed by
Apple. Before I knew it, I was on chapter three, and it was nearly
lunchtime. I had lost all sense of time. I was glued to the text on the
screen and addicted to the chime that fired out of the speakers when my
program ran successfully. That was how it went for many weeks, as I
completed chapter after chapter of the book. Every morning I would set
an alarm for 7 a.m. (before my dad would wake up), go up to his office,
and code. He would eventually come up and have to kick me out, but by
that time I had been coding for so long I saw lines of text when I
closed my eyes.

> 00000110

I spent those months trying so hard to figure out who I wanted to be,
that I forgot who I was. I was the kid who used to sort Legos by colors
and counted all the Goldfish before I ate them. I was the kid who asked,
"why" repeatedly. Not to annoy adults, but to get the reasons for why
things were.

My dad saw all of this. I'm uncertain if he consciously knew what was
going on, but he somehow knew that I needed a hand. He somehow knew that
when I was left on my own, this curiosity and logical process lead to
perfectionism. He knew that I tried to get every Lego into its color
sorted pile and got frustrated when the Legos just kept coming.

He helped me focus more on the process of thinking than the perfection I
was chasing. When I strayed too far, and got hung up getting the perfect
result, he reminded me that's not what it\'s about. It's about the
process, going from a problem to a solution. I was learning to solve
problems. That's what I think my dad has been trying to show me this
whole time. It doesn't matter whether I get the right answer or a
perfect 100 on a calculus test. It matters that my thought process is
improving.

I've struggled lately without his influence. College applications, AP
Physics, and just the stress of being a teenager has been overwhelming.
Although they're not on the other side of the world, my parents are not
with me at Exeter. I'm usually too busy figuring out what the net torque
on a pulley is to call them. I've been hung up on the result rather than
the process. Hung up on getting that perfect score, instead of focusing
on learning the material.

> 00000111

When I start coding, I just have an idea in my head, and a blank
computer screen in front of me. One of the reasons I love coding so much
is because it's a process. I need to transfer the thoughts from my head
into an executable program (executable is a computer science term used
to describe a program that could be run by a computer).

The first step in this process is to determine the logic that goes into
the program. Like, will I need a loop? Or what's the class diagram going
to look like? All questions that need to be answered before I write a
line of code. Or rather, should be answered. In reality, I am under a
time crunch and skip writing the plan down and just go with what's in my
head (my dad says this is true in the professional world too). Whether
it's a physical plan or mental one, I still need to think of how to get
the idea out of my head. It's like having a goal, but without any clue
how I will get there. With enough tries and countless failures, I'll
have a mild idea of what I'm supposed to do. The next step is to make
something tangible, to transfer the thoughts in my head to code on a
computer. I could go on about the syntactic sugar of Python or how much
I hate coding in JavaScript, but that wouldn't make sense to most
people. After all, not everyone thinks like a computer.

Instead, I'll focus on perfection, the thing I've been chasing my whole
life. Chasing the perfect grades, the perfect friends, the perfect
personality. My parents always tell me perfection is unachievable. My
friends say, "It's impossible." I want to prove them all wrong. I want
to show them that, if I work hard enough, I'll achieve perfection.

> 00001000

When I was writing this meditation, I struggled to transfer my thoughts
into words on the page. I spent night after night writing and rewriting
the sections. Night after night trying to make it good enough. The day
before it was due, I conferenced with my English teacher. I told her
that I was a perfectionist, and I couldn't figure out how to put what I
was thinking into words. She responded, "I could tell." Since then, I've
rewritten this section six times, changed the formatting three times,
and changed the title twice.

This meditation will never be good enough. I'll never find the right
words to say what I'm thinking. I think this is somewhat ironic. I'm so
good at transferring my thoughts into code yet can't transfer them to
words. Maybe that's a sign of how I think. Maybe that's why I'm so
quiet. Transferring my thoughts into words is hard for me but
transferring them into logic is not. I can write a program that solves a
differential equation in two minutes, but I struggle to make more than
three points in a 50-minute Harkness class.

A computer is an extension on this logic, an extension of my brain. But
the computer frees me. It doesn't care if I'm anxious or stressed. It
doesn't care if I'm coding at 11 p.m. while drinking Red Bull and
blasting AC/DC. I can spend excessive amounts of time trying to make my
code perfect, with the perfect format, the perfect runtime. Ultimately,
the computer doesn't know. The computer does not know the difference
between perfection and non-perfection. If the code runs, it runs.

> 00001001

The quote at the beginning of this meditation is "Think Different"
written in binary. It's a quote from an Apple ad campaign, back before
Apple was a multi-trillion-dollar company. I said before that most
people don't understand how computers work and I'll say it again.
There's an even smaller subset of the population who are programmers
that can teach others. These are the people, to overuse the cliché term,
who "think different." My dad is also one of those people. I would be
lying if I said he told me how to program. He didn't--- he taught me how
to love programming, to write the steps to solve an algorithm, to know
when the algorithm is finished, even if it's not finished.

My dad once told me about O(1), a programming term (pronounced o of 1)
that describes an algorithm which runs at constant time, no matter the
size of input. It's the ideal runtime. One might even describe it as
"perfection." He said it's easy to chase O(1), but it's usually
physically impossible to achieve. There are some things that just cannot
be done in a constant time, no matter how hard I try. I could spend my
whole life trying to find a way to do it, but I would never be
successful.

Piltch

Part of me still wants to try. To spend my entire life chasing
perfection, even if I know it's impossible. But what I'm beginning to
realize, is that instead of focusing on that perfect O(1), I can focus
on those little moments. The staying up late drinking Red Bull. The
writing code for so long that when I close my eyes, I see lines of text.
The midnight texts I send to my dad when I finally make it work and
everything pays off.

I've learned that I don't love programming because of the joy I get when
it works. Nor do I love it because my dad is a programmer. I love
programming because it helps me process my thoughts. A program I write
becomes an extension of my brain. That program won't be perfect, and
that's okay. I'm learning that it's okay that I'm not perfect either.
